## Intro Wireshark Lab

One’s understanding of network protocols can often be greatly deepened by seeing them in action and by playing around with them — observing the sequence of messages exchanged between two protocol entities, delving into the details of protocol operation, causing protocols to perform certain actions, and observing these actions and their consequences. This can be done in simulated scenarios or in a real network environment such as the Internet. The interactive animations at the textbook Web site take the first approach. In the Wireshark labs, we’ll take the latter approach. You’ll run network applications in various scenarios using a computer on your desk, at home, or in a lab. You’ll observe the network protocols in your computer, interacting and exchanging messages with protocol entities executing elsewhere in the Internet. Thus, you and your computer will be an integral part of these live labs. You’ll observe — and you’ll learn — by doing.

The basic tool for observing the messages exchanged between executing protocol entities is called a packet sniffer. As the name suggests, a packet sniffer passively copies (sniffs) messages being sent from and received by your computer; it also displays the contents of the various protocol fields of these captured messages.Wireshark is a free packet sniffer that runs on Windows, Linux/Unix, and Mac computers. Throughout the textbook, you will find Wireshark labs that allow you to explore a number of the protocols studied in the chapter. In this first Wireshark lab, you’ll obtain and install a copy of Wireshark, access a Web site, and capture and examine the protocol messages being exchanged between your Web browser and the Web server.
